\input texinfo @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename dynadt.info
@settitle Dynamic Abstract Data Types
@c @finalout
@c @smallbook
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@footnotestyle separate
@synindex cp fn
@syncodeindex tp fn
@c %**end of header

@ifinfo
This file describes Dynamic Abstract Data Types, a reusable software
library providing dynamically-resizing data structures.

Software and documentation Copyright 1993, 1994, 1995 Z-Code Software
Corp., San Rafael, CA 94903.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title Dynamic Abstract Data Types
@subtitle Reusable data structures for C programs
@subtitle Manual version $Revision: 2.63 $
@subtitle $Date: 1996/08/20 00:11:30 $
@author Bob Glickstein
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
This manual describes Dynamic Abstract Data Types, a reusable software
library providing dynamically-resizing data structures.

Software and documentation Copyright @copyright{} 1993 Z-Code Software Corp.,
San Rafael, CA  94903
@end titlepage

@node Top, Glist, (dir), (dir)
@unnumbered Introduction

This manual describes Dynamic Abstract Data Types, a reusable software
library providing dynamically-resizing data structures for use in C
system and application programming.

@ifinfo
Manual version:  $Revision: 2.63 $ $Date: 1996/08/20 00:11:30 $
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Glist::                       
* Dlist::                       
* Dynstr::                      
* Intset::                      
* Hashtab::                     
* Sklist::                      
* Prqueue::                     
* Dpipe::                       
* Miscellaneous::               
* Compiling::                   
* Index::                       
@end menu

@node Glist, Dlist, Top, Top
@chapter Glist

@cindex grow list
A Glist is a @dfn{grow list}.  Like a stack, data can be added to and
removed from the end.  Like an array, elements in the middle can be
accessed and changed.  A Glist expands automatically to accommodate data
as it is added.

A single Glist holds elements of a single type.  It actually holds
@emph{copies} of those elements.  When you hand a Glist a pointer to
some data element, it copies that element according to the @code{sizeof}
the data type into its private space.  The accessor functions
@w{@code{glist_Nth}} and @w{@code{glist_Last}} return pointers to the private
copies of the data.

@cindex volatile pointer
@cindex pointer relocation
@cindex relocation of pointers
It is important to note that the pointers returned by @w{@code{glist_Nth}}
and @w{@code{glist_Last}} are volatile; their contents may relocate if a
subsequent @w{@code{glist_Add}} or @w{@code{glist_Insert}} causes a
@code{realloc} of the Glist's private memory, rendering the returned
pointers useless.  Therefore, pointers into Glists should be used with
care.  If in doubt, don't save the pointer value, save the index of the
element you care about, and use repeated calls to @w{@code{glist_Nth}}.

@tindex struct glist
@deftypefn Function void glist_Init (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}}, @w{int @var{eltsize}}, @w{int @var{growsize}})
Initialize the @code{struct glist} pointed to by @var{gl}.  The size of
an element in the new Glist will be @var{eltsize}, and when the Glist is
full, an attempt to add another element will cause the Glist to be
expanded by @var{growsize} uninitialized entries.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int glist_EmptyP (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}})
Yields zero if @var{gl} is a non-empty Glist, non-zero otherwise.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int glist_Length (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}})
Yields the number of elements in @var{gl}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function int glist_Add (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}}, @w{const void *@var{elt}})
Adds a new value to the end of @var{gl}.  The value is pointed to by
@var{elt}, whose referent is copied into the Glist.  The number of bytes
to copy was given as @var{eltsize} in @w{@code{glist_Init}}.  Returns
the position of the newly-added element.  If @var{elt} is 0, an empty
element is added and is initialized with @w{@code{bzero}}.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void glist_Insert (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}}, @w{const void *@var{elt}}, @w{int @var{n}})
Insert an element into @var{gl}.  The element to insert is pointed to by
@var{elt}.  The newly-added element will be located at position @var{n}.
The old elements occupying locations @var{n} and higher are shifted to
the right, resulting in the Glist growing by one.  This is an O(@var{n})
operation.  Legal values for @var{n} are in the range 0 to
@w{@code{glist_Length(@var{gl})}} inclusive.  Note that

@example
@group
glist_Insert(@var{gl}, @var{elt}, glist_Length(@var{gl}));
@end group
@end example

@noindent
is exactly equivalent to

@example
@group
glist_Add(@var{gl}, @var{elt});
@end group
@end example

Glists are not optimized for mid-list insertion.  If you find yourself
using @w{@code{glist_Insert}} frequently, consider using a Dlist instead
(@pxref{Dlist}).

If @var{elt} is 0, an empty element is inserted and initialized with
@w{@code{bzero}}.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void *} glist_Last (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}})
Returns a pointer to the last element of @var{gl}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void *} glist_Nth (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}}, @w{int @var{n}})
Returns a pointer to the element of @var{gl} whose position is @var{n},
where @var{n} lies between 0 and @w{@code{glist_Length(@var{gl}) -
1}}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int glist_Pop (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}})
Shortens @var{gl} by one, discarding the last value in it.  Yields the
new number of values in the Glist.  Do @emph{not} call this macro on an
empty Glist!
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro {void} glist_Truncate (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}}, @w{int @var{num}})
Truncates @var{gl} to contain @var{num} entries (by discarding all but
entries 0 through @w{@var{num} - 1}).  It is an error for @var{num} to
be greater than @w{@code{glist_Length(@var{gl})}}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void glist_Remove (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}}, @w{int @var{n}})
Removes the element from @var{gl} whose position is @var{n}.  Elements
in @var{gl} whose positions are higher than @var{n} are shifted to the
left, shortening the Glist by one.  This is an O(@var{n}) operation.

Glists are not optimized for mid-list removal.  If you find yourself
using @w{@code{glist_Remove}} frequently, consider using a Dlist instead
(@pxref{Dlist}).
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void glist_Set (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}}, @w{int @var{n}}, @w{const void *@var{elt}})
Destructively replace the element in @var{gl} at position @var{n} with
the element pointed to by @var{elt}.  If @var{n} is larger than the
largest index in @var{gl}, then @var{gl} will automatically be extended
to be exactly @w{@code{@var{n} + 1}} entries long; however, any
intervening entries added by extending @var{gl} in this way remain
completely uninitialized and will initially contain random garbage.  If
@var{elt} is 0, an empty element replaces the affected element and is
initialized with @w{@code{bzero}}.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void glist_Sort (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}}, @w{int (*@var{compare})(const void *, const void *)})
Sort the elements of @var{gl} in place according to the sorting
predicate @var{compare} which, as in @code{qsort}, is a function taking
pointers to two elements and returns a value less than, equal to, or
greater than zero depending on whether its first argument is to be
considered less than, equal to, or greater than its second argument.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function int glist_Bsearch (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}}, @w{const void *@var{probe}}, @w{int (*@var{compare})(const void *, const void *)})
Perform binary search for an element of @var{gl} matching @var{probe},
using the comparison predicate @var{compare}.  Finds a matching element
in @w{@code{O(log @var{n})}} time.  The elements of @var{gl} must be
sorted in ascending order with respect to the ordering implied by
@var{compare}, which is a function taking pointers to two elements and
returning a value less than, equal to, or greater than zero depending on
whether its first argument is to be considered less than, equal to, or
greater than its second argument.

If a matching element is found, this function returns its index within
@var{gl}; otherwise -1 is returned.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void glist_Swap (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}}, @w{int @var{m}}, @w{int @var{n}})
Swaps the two elements in @var{gl} whose positions are @var{m} and @var{n}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro {} glist_FOREACH (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}}, @w{@var{t}}, @w{@var{v}}, @w{@var{i}})
Replaces the @w{@code{for (@dots{})}} at the beginning of a loop that
traverses the elements of a Glist.  @var{gl} is a pointer to a Glist;
@var{t} is the type of an element of the Glist; @var{v} is the name of a
variable of type @w{@code{@var{t} *}}; and @var{i} is the name of an
@code{int} variable.  Within the body of the loop, @var{i} iterates from
0 through @w{@code{glist_Length(@var{gl}) - 1}}, and in each iteration,
@var{v} points to the @var{i}th element of @var{gl}.  Example:

@example
@group
int i;
struct foo *f;

glist_FOREACH(gl, struct foo, f, i) @{
    printf("The bar field of element %d is %s\n", i, f->bar);
@}
@end group
@end example
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void} glist_Map (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}}, @w{void (*@var{fn})(void *, void *)}, @w{void *@var{data}})
For each element of @var{gl}, invoke @var{fn}, passing a pointer to the
element and @var{data} as arguments.  The function @var{fn} should not
alter @var{gl} (with respect to which elements are in it and in what
order), but may alter the contents of individual elements.

Elements of @var{gl} are traversed in order from 0 through
@w{@code{glist_Length(@var{gl}) - 1}}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void glist_Destroy (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}})
Releases the memory associated with @var{gl}.  If the elements of
@var{gl} have privately-allocated resources (such as memory or file
descriptors), those resources should be released (presumably in a
@w{@code{glist_FOREACH}} loop) prior to calling this function, or
@w{@code{glist_CleanDestroy}} should be used.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void} glist_CleanDestroy (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}}, @w{void (*@var{final})(void *)})
Like @w{@code{glist_Destroy(@var{gl})}}, but first calls @var{final} on
a pointer to each element of @var{gl} (presumably as a destructor).
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void *} glist_GiveUpList (@w{struct glist *@var{gl}})
Like @w{@code{glist_Destroy}}, but returns @var{gl}'s private copy of
the array of elements without destroying it.  No further Glist
operations are possible on @var{gl}.  If @var{n} is the number of
elements in @var{gl} and @var{s} is the size of an element (as given to
@w{@code{glist_Init}}), then the returned array resides in a
@code{malloc} block whose size is at least @w{@code{@var{n} * @var{s}}},
and possibly larger.  This function may also return 0, indicating that
@var{gl} is and always has been empty (no memory was ever allocated for
it).
@end deftypefn

@node Dlist, Dynstr, Glist, Top
@chapter Dlist

@cindex doubly-linked list
A Dlist is a doubly-linked list.  Like a Glist, a single Dlist holds
elements of a single type.  In fact, Dlists are implemented as Glists
with next and previous links added.  As such, many of the same rules and
caveats apply: data elements are @emph{copied} into the Dlist's private
space, and pointers into Dlists can become invalid if a Dlist-growing
operation (@w{@code{dlist_Append}}, @w{@code{dlist_Prepend}},
@w{@code{dlist_InsertBefore}}, or @w{@code{dlist_InsertAfter}}) causes a
@code{realloc} of the Dlist's private memory.  @xref{Glist}.

Note that Dlist elements are referred to by an integer index, but the
value of the index does not reflect the element's position within
doubly-linked list ordering.

@tindex struct dlist
@deftypefn Function void dlist_Init (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}}, @w{int @var{eltsize}}, @w{int @var{growsize}})
Initialize the @w{@code{struct dlist}} pointed to by @var{dl}.  The size of
an element in the new Dlist will be @var{eltsize}, and when the Dlist is
full, an attempt to add another element will cause the Dlist to be
expanded by @var{growsize} uninitialized entries.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int dlist_EmptyP (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}})
Yields zero if @var{dl} is non-empty, non-zero otherwise.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int dlist_Head (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}})
Yields the index of the head element of @var{dl}, or -1 if the
list is empty.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int dlist_Tail (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}})
Yields the index of the tail element of @var{dl}, or -1 if the
list is empty.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void *} dlist_HeadElt (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}})
Yields the head element of @var{dl}.  This is exactly equivalent to

@example
dlist_Nth(@var{dl}, dlist_Head(@var{dl}))
@end example

The Dlist @var{dl} must not be empty.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void *} dlist_TailElt (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}})
Yields the tail element of @var{dl}.  This is exactly equivalent to

@example
dlist_Nth(@var{dl}, dlist_Head(@var{dl}))
@end example

The Dlist @var{dl} must not be empty.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int dlist_Length (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}})
Yields the number of elements in @var{dl}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro {void *} dlist_Nth (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}}, @w{int @var{i}})
Yields a pointer to the element of @var{dl} whose index is @var{i}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int dlist_Next (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}}, @w{int @var{i}})
Yields the index of the element of @var{dl} that is next after element
number @var{i}, or -1 if there is no next element.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int dlist_Prev (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}}, @w{int @var{i}})
Yields the index of the elements of @var{dl} that is previous to element
number @var{i}, or -1 if there is no previous element.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function int dlist_Prepend (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}}, @w{const void *@var{elt}})
Prepend to @var{dl} the element pointed to by @var{elt}.  Returns the
index of the newly-added element.  The new element becomes the new head
of the Dlist.  It has no Prev element, and its Next element is the
former head of the Dlist (if any).  If @var{elt} is 0, an empty element
initialized with @w{@code{bzero}} is prepended.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function int dlist_Append (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}}, @w{const void *@var{elt}})
Append to @var{dl} the element pointed to by @var{elt}.  Returns the
index of the newly-added element.  The new element becomes the new tail
of the Dlist.  It has no Next element, and its Prev element is the
former tail of the Dlist (if any).  If @var{elt} is 0, an empty element
initialized with @w{@code{bzero}} is appended.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function int dlist_InsertAfter (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}}, @w{int @var{after}}, @w{const void *@var{elt}})
Insert into @var{dl}, after the element whose index is @var{after}, an
element pointed to by @var{elt}.  Returns the index of the newly-added
element.  The new element becomes the Next of the element at
@var{after}, and becomes the Prev of @var{after}'s old Next.  If
@var{elt} is 0, an empty element is inserted and initialized with
@w{@code{bzero}}.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function int dlist_InsertBefore (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}}, @w{int @var{before}}, @w{const void *@var{elt}})
Insert into @var{dl}, before the element whose index is @var{before}, an
element pointed to by @var{elt}.  Returns the index of the newly-added
element.  The new element becomes the Prev of the element at
@var{before}, and becomes the Next of @var{before}'s old Prev.  If
@var{elt} is 0, an empty element is inserted and initialized with
@w{@code{bzero}}.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dlist_Remove (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}}, @w{int @var{i}})
Remove from @var{dl} the element whose index is @var{i}.  The deleted
element's old Prev and Next elements are made to point at each other.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dlist_Replace (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}}, @w{int @var{n}}, @w{const void *@var{elt}})
Replaces the element of @var{dl} whose index is @var{n} with the element
pointed to by @var{elt}.  If @var{elt} is 0, an empty element replaces
the affected element, and is initialized with @w{@code{bzero}}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro {} dlist_FOREACH (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}}, @w{@var{t}}, @w{@var{v}}, @w{@var{i}})
Replaces the @w{@code{for (@dots{})}} at the top of a loop that iterates
over the elements of @var{dl} in order, from head to tail; @var{t} is
the type of an element of the Dlist; @var{v} is the name of a variable
of type @w{@code{@var{t} *}}, and @var{i} is the name of an integer variable
which, each iteration through the loop, holds the value of the current
index.  Within the body of the loop, @var{v} points to the current
(@var{i}th) element of @var{dl}.  Example:

@example
@group
int i;
struct foo *f;

dlist_FOREACH(dl, struct foo, f, i) @{
    printf("bar field of next element is %s\n", f->bar);
@}
@end group
@end example

The expansion of this macro computes the next element in the Dlist from
the current element at the end of each loop iteration.  This means that
the loop body must not remove the current element from the Dlist;
otherwise, the ``next'' computation will yield garbage.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro {} dlist_FOREACH2 (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}}, @w{@var{t}}, @w{@var{v}}, @w{@var{i}}, @w{@var{j}})
Like @w{@code{dlist_FOREACH}}, but allows the loop body to remove the
current Dlist element.  The caller passes the name of an additional
integer variable, @var{j}.  The ``next'' computation takes place at the
@emph{top} of each loop and @var{j} holds the index of the next element.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void} dlist_Map (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}}, @w{void (*@var{fn})(void *, void *)}, @w{void *@var{data}})
For each element of @var{dl}, invoke @var{fn}, passing a pointer to the
element and @var{data} as arguments.  The function @var{fn} should not
alter @var{dl} (with respect to which elements are in it and in what
order), but may alter the contents of individual elements.

Elements of @var{dl} are traversed in order from head to tail.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dlist_Destroy (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}})
Releases the memory associated with @var{dl}.  If the elements if
@var{dl} have privately-allocated resources (such as memory or file
descriptors), those resources should be released (presumably in a
@w{@code{dlist_FOREACH}} loop) prior to calling this function, or
@w{@code{dlist_CleanDestroy}} should be used.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void} dlist_CleanDestroy (@w{struct dlist *@var{dl}}, @w{void (*@var{final})(void *)})
Like @w{@code{dlist_Destroy(@var{dl})}}, but first calls @var{final} on
a pointer to each element of @var{dl} (presumably as a destructor).
@end deftypefn

@node Dynstr, Intset, Dlist, Top
@chapter Dynstr

@cindex dynamic string
@cindex conventional string
@cindex string
A Dynstr is a dynamically-allocated string which grows and shrinks as
necessary to accommodate the characters in it.  Dynstr strings are
@code{NUL}-terminated like conventional C strings; in fact, the macro
@w{@code{dynstr_Str}} yields the conventional string contained within a
Dynstr.  However, that string should not be manipulated in certain ways
without its containing Dynstr's knowledge.  In particular, its
terminating @code{NUL} should not move, and the string should not be
passed to @code{realloc} or @code{free} or the like.

Since the string contained in a Dynstr may relocate (as the result of a
@code{realloc}), the pointer returned by @w{@code{dynstr_Str}} may become
invalid.  It is therefore preferable to use repeated calls to
@w{@code{dynstr_Str}} than to squirrel away a copy of the pointer.

@tindex struct dynstr
@deftypefn Function void dynstr_Init (@w{struct dynstr *@var{d}})
Initializes the @w{@code{struct dynstr}} pointed to by @var{d}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dynstr_InitFrom (@w{struct dynstr *@var{d}}, @w{char *@var{str}})
Initializes @var{d} (which should not have been previously initialized)
with the already-@code{malloc}'d string @var{str}.  This is equivalent
to

@example
@group
dynstr_Init(@var{d});
dynstr_Set(@var{d}, @var{str});
@end group
@end example

@noindent
but doesn't create a new copy of the string.  Use this function when you
have a string in a @code{malloc}-allocated piece of memory which you
wish to place under Dynstr control.

The amount of space @code{malloc}'d for @var{str} is presumed to be
equal to @w{@code{1 + strlen(@var{str})}}.  After this function call,
@var{str} becomes the ``property'' of @var{d}, in a sense; the caller
should not attempt to @code{free} or @code{realloc} it, should
@w{@code{dynstr_Destroy}} @var{d} normally when finished with it, and in
general should obey the rules for @w{@code{dynstr_Str}} outlined above.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int dynstr_EmptyP (@w{const struct dynstr *@var{d}})
Yields zero if @var{d} is non-empty (@w{@code{dynstr_Length}} is greater
than 0), non-zero otherwise.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function int dynstr_Length (@w{const struct dynstr *@var{d}})
Returns the number of characters in @var{d}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro {char *} dynstr_Str (@w{const struct dynstr *@var{d}})
Yields the character string contained in @var{d}.  The value returned is
never 0 (this is a change from earlier versions of this software).
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dynstr_Set (@w{struct dynstr *@var{d}}, @w{const char *@var{str}})
Sets the contents of @var{d} to be a copy of the string @var{str},
erasing any old contents of @var{d}.  If @var{str} is 0, then any
allocated memory associated with @var{d} is freed and the empty string
is assigned to @var{d}.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dynstr_Append (@w{struct dynstr *@var{d}}, @w{const char *@var{str}})
Appends to @var{d} a copy of the character string @var{str}.  Like
@w{@code{strcat(dynstr_Str(@var{d}), @var{str})}} but without the
memory-allocation hassle.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dynstr_AppendN (@w{struct dynstr *@var{d}}, @w{const char *@var{str}}, @w{int @var{n}})
Appends to @var{d} a copy of the character string @var{str}, stopping after
@var{n} characters are copied or at the end of @var{str}, whichever
comes first.  This function is to @w{@code{dynstr_Append}} as @code{strncat}
is to @code{strcat}.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function int dynstr_AppendChar (@w{struct dynstr *@var{d}}, @w{int @var{c}})
Appends to @var{d} the single character @var{c} and returns the added
character.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function int dynstr_Chop (@w{struct dynstr *@var{d}})
Shortens @var{d} by one character by chopping it off the end.  Returns
the chopped character.  Inspired by Perl.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function int dynstr_ChopN (@w{struct dynstr *@var{d}}, @w{unsigned @var{n}})
Shortens @var{d} by chopping @var{n} characters off the end.

No range check is performed; @var{n} must not be greater than
@w{@code{dynstr_Length(@var{d})}}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function int dynstr_KeepN (@w{struct dynstr *@var{d}}, @w{unsigned @var{n}})
Shortens @var{d} by keeping only the leading @var{n} characters.
@var{n} is a count, not a positional index; if @var{n} is zero, the
dynstr will become empty.

No range check is performed; @var{n} must not be greater than
@w{@code{dynstr_Length(@var{d})}}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dynstr_Replace (@w{struct dynstr *@var{d}}, @w{int @var{start}}, @w{int @var{len}}, @w{const char *@var{str}})
Replace a substring of @var{d} with a new string.  Characters beginning
at position @var{start} (zero-based) and continuing for @var{len} bytes
are replaced by the @code{NUL}-terminated string @var{str}, shortening
or lengthening @var{d} as necessary.

No range checks are performed; @var{start} and @w{@code{(@var{start} +
@var{len})}} must both lie between 0 and
@w{@code{dynstr_Length(@var{d})}}, inclusive.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dynstr_ReplaceN (@w{struct dynstr *@var{d}}, @w{int @var{start}}, @w{int @var{len}}, @w{const char *@var{str}}, @w{int @var{n}})
Like @w{@code{dynstr_Replace}}, but replaces the substring of @var{d} with
at most @var{n} characters from @var{str} (stopping earlier if @var{str}
is shorter than @var{n} characters).

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dynstr_ReplaceChar (@w{struct dynstr *@var{d}}, @w{int @var{start}}, @w{int @var{len}}, @w{int @var{c}})
Like @w{@code{dynstr_Replace}}, but replaces the substring of @var{d} with
the single character @var{c}.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro void dynstr_Insert (@w{struct dynstr *@var{d}}, @w{int @var{pos}}, @w{const char *@var{str})}
Insert into @var{d} at position @var{pos} the @code{NUL}-terminated
string @var{str}.  This macro simply calls
@code{@w{dynstr_Replace(@var{d},} @var{pos}, 0, @var{str})}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro void dynstr_InsertN (@w{struct dynstr *@var{d}}, @w{int @var{pos}}, @w{const char *@var{str}}, @w{int @var{n}})
Insert into @var{d} at position @var{pos} the string @var{str}, stopping
after @var{n} bytes have been copied or upon reaching the end of
@var{str}, whichever comes first.  This macro simply calls
@code{@w{dynstr_ReplaceN(@var{d},} @var{pos}, 0, @var{str}, @var{n})}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro void dynstr_InsertChar (@w{struct dynstr *@var{d}}, @w{int @var{pos}}, @w{int @var{c}})
Insert into @var{d} at position @var{pos} the single character @var{c}.
This macro simply calls @code{@w{dynstr_ReplaceChar(@var{d},} @var{pos},
0, @var{c})}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro void dynstr_Delete (@w{struct dynstr *@var{d}}, @w{int @var{pos}}, @w{int @var{len}})
Delete from @var{d} a substring of characters beginning at position
@var{pos} and continuing for @var{len} bytes.  This macro simply calls
@code{@w{dynstr_Replace(@var{d},} @var{pos}, @var{len}, @w{"")}}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dynstr_Destroy (@w{struct dynstr *@var{d}})
Releases the memory associated with @var{d}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {char *} dynstr_GiveUpStr (@w{struct dynstr *@var{d}})
Like @w{@code{dynstr_Destroy}}, but returns @var{d}'s private copy of the
string (as in @w{@code{dynstr_Str(@var{d})}}) without destroying it.  No
further Dynstr operations are possible on @var{d}.  The resulting string
@var{str} always resides in a @code{malloc} block whose size is at least
@w{@code{strlen(@var{str}) + 1}}, and possibly larger.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@node Intset, Hashtab, Dynstr, Top
@chapter Intset

@cindex integer set
@cindex set of integers
An Intset is a set of integers, implemented as a sorted Dlist of
@dfn{parts}.  Each part is a bit vector of varying size which can
represent a portion of the space of all integers.  When a value is added
to the set, if no part exists to hold the value, then either an existing
part is expanded to include the value, or a new part is linked into the
Dlist, whichever is more space-efficient.

@tindex struct intset
@deftypefn Function void intset_Init (@w{struct intset *@var{iset}})
Initializes the Intset pointed to by @var{iset}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int intset_EmptyP (@w{struct intset *@var{iset}})
Yields zero if @var{iset} is non-empty, non-zero otherwise.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro {int} intset_Count (@w{struct intset *@var{iset}})
Yields the number of elements in @var{iset}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void intset_Add (@w{struct intset *@var{iset}}, @w{int @var{i}})
Adds to the set @var{iset} the value @var{i}.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void intset_AddRange (@w{struct intset *@var{iset}}, @w{int @var{start}}, @w{int @var{end}})
Adds to the set @var{iset} every value in the range @var{start} through
@var{end}, inclusive (@var{start} must not be greater than @var{end}).
This function is equivalent to, but much more efficient than

@example
@group
int i;

for (i = @var{start}; i <= @var{end}; ++i)
    intset_Add(@var{iset}, i);
@end group
@end example

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void intset_Remove (@w{struct intset *@var{iset}}, @w{int @var{i}})
Removes from @var{iset} the value @var{i}.  If @var{i} was not a member of
@var{iset}, this function does nothing.  If this function produces an
empty ``part'' (described above), then the part is deallocated.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void intset_Clear (@w{struct intset *@var{iset}})
Removes all values from the set @var{iset}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function int intset_Contains (@w{struct intset *@var{iset}}, @w{int @var{i}})
Tests whether @var{iset} contains the value @var{i}, returning zero if
not, non-zero if so.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function int intset_Min (@w{struct intset *@var{iset}})
Returns the smallest member of @var{iset}.

If @var{iset} is empty, this function will raise the
@w{@code{strerror(EINVAL)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function int intset_Max (@w{struct intset *@var{iset}})
Returns the largest member of @var{iset}.

If @var{iset} is empty, this function will raise the
@w{@code{strerror(EINVAL)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function int intset_Equal (@w{struct intset *@var{is1}}, @w{struct intset *@var{is2}})
Tests whether @var{is1} contains exactly the same members as @var{is2}.
Returns non-zero if they're equal, zero if non-equal.
@end deftypefn

@tindex struct intset_iterator
@deftypefn Function void intset_InitIterator (@w{struct intset_iterator *@var{isi}})
Initialize @var{isi} for subsequence use in calls to
@w{@code{intset_Iterate}}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {int *} intset_Iterate (@w{struct intset *@var{iset}}, @w{struct intset_iterator *@var{isi}})
Iterates over the elements of @var{iset} using the iterator @var{isi},
which has been initialized with @w{@code{intset_InitIterator}}.  Each call
to this function returns a pointer to a static area containing the
``next'' element of @var{isi} in numerical order (from
@w{@code{intset_Min(@var{iset})}} to @w{@code{intset_Max(@var{iset})}}).  The
iterator @var{isi} is used to record the current position in the
traversal so that the next call to @w{@code{intset_Iterate}} will pick up
from the correct spot.  Multiple concurrent traversals, each using a
separate iterator, are possible.

The contents of @var{isi} must not change during the traversal.  When no
elements remain in a traversal, this function returns 0.  There is no
requirement to complete a particular traversal, and an iterator may be
re-initialized at any time to begin a new traversal.  There is no need
to finalize an iterator.

Example:

@example
@group
struct intset_iterator isi;
int *intptr;

intset_InitIterator(&isi);
while (intptr = intset_Iterate(@var{iset}, &isi)) @{
    @r{code that uses the integer in @w{@code{*intptr}}}
@}
@end group
@end example
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void intset_Destroy (@w{struct intset *@var{iset}})
Releases the memory associated with @var{iset}.
@end deftypefn

@node Hashtab, Sklist, Intset, Top
@chapter Hashtab

@cindex hash table
@cindex open hash table
@cindex bucket
A Hashtab is a hash table, which is a fast-lookup array.  Hashtab
implements an @dfn{open}-style hash table atop Glists and Dlists.  In an
open hash table, a fixed number of @dfn{buckets} holds a variable number
of table elements.  Finding the correct bucket is an O(1) operation;
finding the element within the bucket is a simple linear search.  For
this reason, it is desirable to choose a Hashtab configuration that will
spread elements among buckets evenly, with no bucket getting too
``deep''.

@cindex hash value
Given a hash table element, the correct bucket is found by taking the
@dfn{hash value} of the element modulo the number of buckets in the
Hashtab.  The hash value is determined by the table's @dfn{hash
function}, which should attempt to map elements to as nearly unique
integers as is feasible.  It is also customary practice to choose a
prime number for the number of buckets in the hash table (so the hash
value modulo the number of buckets is least likely to exhibit
periodicity), though it is by no means necessary.

Since Glists and Dlists are used, the same rules and caveats apply:  one
data type per Hashtab; data elements are @emph{copied} into the
Hashtab's private space; and pointers into Hashtabs can become invalid
if a @w{@code{hashtab_Add}} causes a @code{realloc} of the Hashtab's private
memory.  @xref{Glist}.

@tindex struct hashtab
@deftypefn Function void hashtab_Init (@w{struct hashtab *@var{ht}}, @w{unsigned int (*@var{hashfn})(const void *)}, @w{int (*@var{compare})(const void *, const void *)}, @w{int @var{eltsize}}, @w{int @var{nbuckets}})
Initializes hash table @var{ht}.  The hash function to use on elements
of the new table is @var{hashfn}, which takes a pointer to an element
and returns an @w{@code{unsigned int}} hash value.  A predicate to compare
pairs of elements, called the @dfn{comparison predicate}, is given as
@var{compare}, which should take two pointers to elements and return
zero if they are equal, non-zero otherwise.  The size of a data element
is @var{eltsize}.  The number of buckets to create in the new table is
@var{nbuckets}.

If @var{compare} is 0, then @code{bcmp} (or @code{memcmp}, whichever is
available) is used (along with @var{eltsize}).

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void hashtab_Add (@w{struct hashtab *@var{ht}}, @w{const void *@var{elt}})
Add to @var{ht} a copy of the element pointed to by @var{elt}.  The
pointer is first passed to @var{ht}'s hash function to obtain a hash
value.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void *} hashtab_Find (@w{struct hashtab *@var{ht}}, @w{const void *@var{probe}})
Find the element of @var{ht} which matches @var{probe} and return a
pointer to it.  Usually, @var{probe} is a pointer to a
partially-filled-in version of the data structure being sought (for
instance, if the elements of @var{ht} are key-value pairs, @var{probe}
would be a pointer to a pair containing a valid key field but nothing in
the value field).  The element is found using @var{ht}'s hash function
and comparison predicate; this means that @var{probe} must hash the same
as the target element would, and that the comparison predicate must
consider @var{probe} and the target element equal.  If no matching
element is found, 0 is returned.  If multiple matches exist, only the
first one found is returned.  (There is no practical way to determine
which matching element among several would be found first.)
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void hashtab_Remove (@w{struct hashtab *@var{ht}}, @w{const void *@var{probe}})
The element of @var{ht} matching @var{probe} is found (as described
above in @w{@code{hashtab_Find}}) and removed.  If no matching element is
found, this function silently does nothing.  If multiple matches exist,
only the first one found is removed.  (There is no practical way to
determine which matching element among several would be found first.)

If @var{probe} is 0, then the last element of @var{ht} returned by a
call to @w{@code{hashtab_Find}} or @w{@code{hashtab_Iterate}} is removed
without performing a new search.  This special case performs no
error-checking, so be sure that there @emph{has} been a successful
@w{@code{hashtab_Find}} or @w{@code{hashtab_Iterate}} and that the
resulting element has not already been removed before calling
@w{@code{hashtab_Remove(@var{ht}, 0)}}.
@end deftypefn

@tindex struct hashtab_iterator
@deftypefn Function void hashtab_InitIterator (@w{struct hashtab_iterator *@var{hti}})
Initialize @var{hti} for subsequent use in calls to
@w{@code{hashtab_Iterate}}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void *} hashtab_Iterate (@w{struct hashtab *@var{ht}}, @w{struct hashtab_iterator *@var{hti}})
Iterates over the elements of @var{ht} using the iterator @var{hti},
which has been initialized with @w{@code{hashtab_InitIterator}}.  Each call
to this function returns a pointer to the ``next'' element of @var{ht}
(according to an apparently-random traversal of @var{ht}).  The iterator
@var{hti} is used to record the current position in the traversal so
that the next call to @w{@code{hashtab_Iterate}} will pick up from the
correct spot.  Multiple concurrent traversals, each using a separate
iterator, are possible.

Each traversal is guaranteed to reach each element of @var{ht} exactly
once, but the contents of @var{ht} must not change during the traversal.
(If an iterator is used without reinitializing @emph{after} the Hashtab
is modified, the result isn't even guaranteed to be @emph{in} the
Hashtab!)  When no elements remain in a traversal, this function returns
0.  There is no requirement to complete a particular traversal, and an
iterator may be re-initialized at any time to begin a new traversal.
There is no need to finalize an iterator.

Example:

@example
@group
struct hashtab_iterator hti;
struct foo *fooptr;

hashtab_InitIterator(&hti);
while (fooptr = (struct foo *) hashtab_Iterate(@var{ht}, &hti)) @{
    @r{code that uses @code{fooptr}}
@}
@end group
@end example
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {unsigned int} hashtab_StringHash (@w{const char *@var{str}})
Computes and returns a hash value for the @code{NUL}-terminated string
@var{str}.  This function is provided as a convenience; it is quite a
good hash function for short and medium-length strings, especially
identifier names in programming languages.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int hashtab_EmptyP (@w{struct hashtab *@var{ht}})
Yields zero if @var{ht} is a non-empty Hashtab, non-zero otherwise.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int hashtab_Length (@w{struct hashtab *@var{ht}})
Yields the number of elements in @var{ht}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int hashtab_NumBuckets (@w{struct hashtab *@var{ht}})
Yields the number of buckets in @var{ht}, which was given by the latest
call to @w{@code{hashtab_Init}} or @w{@code{hashtab_Rehash}}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void hashtab_Stats (@w{const struct hashtab *@var{ht}}, @w{double *@var{mean}}, @w{double *@var{variance}})
Compute statistics about the distribution of elements among the buckets
of @var{ht}.  The mean length of a bucket is placed in the @code{double}
pointed to by @var{mean}, and the variance is placed in the
@code{double} pointed to by @var{variance}.  (The square root of the
variance is the @dfn{standard deviation}.)  Either @var{mean} or
@var{variance} may be 0 if that value is not desired, but if the
variance is desired but not the mean, be aware that the mean is computed
internally anyway.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void hashtab_Rehash (@w{struct hashtab *@var{ht}}, @w{int @var{newbuckets}}, @w{unsigned int (*@var{newhash})(const void *)})
Redistribute the elements of @var{ht} among a new number of buckets
@var{newbuckets} and/or using a new hash function @var{newhash}.  To
leave the number of buckets alone, @var{newbuckets} should be 0; to
leave the hash function alone, @var{newhash} should be 0.  This function
is typically used when @w{@code{hashtab_Stats}} reveals that the hash
table has grown large or imperfectly (resulting in buckets that are too
large, or in very uneven growth among the buckets), or when deletions
have left the hash table sparse and fewer buckets are called for.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void} hashtab_Map (@w{struct hashtab *@var{ht}}, @w{void (*@var{fn})(void *, void *)}, @w{void *@var{data}})
For each element of @var{ht}, invoke @var{fn}, passing a pointer to the
element and @var{data} as arguments.  The function @var{fn} should not
alter @var{ht} (with respect to which elements are in it), but may alter
the contents of individual elements.

Elements of @var{ht} are traversed in an apparently-random order.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void hashtab_Destroy (@w{struct hashtab *@var{ht}})
Releases the memory associated with @var{ht}.  If the elements of
@var{ht} have privately-allocated resources (such as memory or file
descriptors), those resources should be released (presumably in a
@w{@code{hashtab_Iterate}} traversal) prior to calling this function, or
@w{@code{hashtab_CleanDestroy}} should be used.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void} hashtab_CleanDestroy (@w{struct hashtab *@var{ht}}, @w{void (*@var{final})(void *)})
Like @w{@code{hashtab_Destroy(@var{ht})}}, but first calls @var{final}
on a pointer to each element of @var{ht} (presumably as a destructor).
@end deftypefn

@node Sklist, Prqueue, Hashtab, Top
@chapter Sklist

@cindex skip list
A skip list is a special kind of linked list for keeping data in sorted
order.  Its searching efficiency is comparable to that of a balanced
binary tree, but the implementation is vastly simpler and the overhead
is lower.

In a skip list, each element is stored in a node of a randomly-chosen
@dfn{level}.  A node of level @var{n} contains @w{@code{@var{n} + 1}}
forward pointers, where the @var{k}th pointer points to the next node of
level @var{k} or higher.

When a new node is inserted in the skip list, its level is chosen based
on @var{P}, the probability of choosing a higher level for the node.
The probability that a node's level is higher than @var{L} is
@w{@code{@var{P}^(@var{L} + 1)}}.  A skip list's value of @var{P} is
specified as a ratio (numerator, denominator) in a call to
@w{@code{sklist_Init}}.  An empirically good value for @var{P} is
@w{1/4}.

@findex Srandom
Because the random-number generator is used in creating skip list nodes,
it is a good idea for the application to initialize the random-number
generator some time before skip list insertions begin happening.  Some C
libraries provide the function @code{srand} for this purpose; others
provide @code{srandom}.  The macro @w{@code{Srandom(@var{seed})}} invokes
the correct variant for your platform.@footnote{You should always use
@code{Srandom} rather than calling @code{srand} or @code{srandom}
directly.  If your platform supplies both @code{srand} and
@code{srandom}, there is no good way to tell which random-number
generator will be used by Sklist, but @code{Srandom} will always
initialize the right one.}

Skip lists were described in the June 1990 issue of @cite{Communications
of the ACM} (volume 33, number 6), in ``Skip Lists:  A Probabilistic
Alternative to Balanced Trees'' by William Pugh.

@tindex struct sklist
@deftypefn Function void sklist_Init (@w{struct sklist *@var{skl}}, @w{int @var{eltsize}}, @w{int (*@var{cmp})(const void *, const void *)}, @w{int @var{numerator}}, @w{int @var{denominator}})
Initialize the skip list pointed to by @var{skl}.  The size of an
element in the new skip list is @var{eltsize}; @var{cmp} is a pointer to
a @dfn{comparison function}, an @code{int}-returning function which
takes as arguments two pointers to skip list elements and compares them
in the style of @code{strcmp}; and @var{numerator} and @var{denominator}
form the ratio @var{P} described above (the recommended values are 1 and
4).

If @var{cmp} is 0, then @code{bcmp} (or @code{memcmp}, whichever is
available) is used (along with @var{eltsize}).
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int sklist_Length (@w{struct sklist *@var{skl}})
Yields the number of elements in @var{skl}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int sklist_Empty (@w{struct sklist *@var{skl}})
Yields zero if @var{skl} is non-empty, non-zero otherwise.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void *} sklist_Insert (@w{struct sklist *@var{skl}}, @w{const void *@var{elt}})
Insert into @var{skl} the element pointed to by @var{elt}.  The referent
of @var{elt} is copied into the skip list.  The number of bytes to copy
was given as @var{eltsize} when the skip list was initialized with
@w{@code{sklist_Init}}.  Returns a pointer to the new node in the skip list.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void *} sklist_Find (@w{struct sklist *@var{skl}}, @w{const void *@var{probe}}, @w{int @var{record}})
Find in @var{skl} a data element which matches @var{probe} (according to
the comparison function given in the call to @w{@code{sklist_Init}}).
Return that element if found, or 0 if not.  The @var{record} parameter
controls whether the skip list records the path to the found item.  If
non-zero, the path will be recorded internally and can be used to speed
a subsequent @w{@code{sklist_Remove}} or @w{@code{sklist_CleanRemove}}
operation (@i{q.v.}).  If @var{record} is zero, the path will not be
recorded and this function will run slightly faster.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception (but only
if @var{record} is non-zero).
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void sklist_Remove (@w{struct sklist *@var{skl}}, @w{const void *@var{probe}})
Remove from @var{skl} the element which matches @var{probe} (according
to the comparison function given in the call to @w{@code{sklist_Init}}).
If @var{skl} contains multiple matches for @var{probe} only one is
removed.  (There is no practical way to determine which matching element
among several would be found first.)  If no matching element is found,
this function silently does nothing.  The storage containing the
affected element is freed, making the removed element inaccessible after
this call; if it contains private data that needs finalizing, use
@w{@code{sklist_CleanRemove}} instead.

If @var{probe} is 0, then the last element found by a call to
@w{@code{sklist_Find}} is removed, but only if the @var{record}
parameter was non-zero in that call, and only if no other operation
involving a skip list search has intervened.  (That includes
@w{@code{sklist_Insert}}, @w{@code{sklist_Remove}},
@w{@code{sklist_CleanRemove}}, and @w{@code{sklist_Find}}.)  Note that a
call to such a function on @emph{any} skip list invalidates the
``recorded'' information for @emph{all} skip lists.  Note that this
common idiom is fine:

@example
@group
if (sklist_Find(skl, probe, 1)) @{
    sklist_Remove(skl, 0);
@} else @{
    @r{@dots{}not found@dots{}}
@}
@end group
@end example
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void} sklist_CleanRemove (@w{struct sklist *@var{skl}}, @w{void *@var{probe}}, @w{void (*@var{final})(void *)})
Like @w{@code{sklist_Remove(@var{skl}, @var{probe})}}, but first
@var{final} is called on a pointer to the element to be removed, if one
is found.  Presumably @var{final} is a destructor.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void *} sklist_LastMiss (@w{struct sklist *@var{skl}})
Returns the @dfn{last miss} element from the previous search operation
in @var{skl}.  The last miss is the element immediately ``to the left''
of an element sought in the previous search, regardless of whether that
search succeeded.  If there is no such element in @var{skl}, this
function returns 0.

As when using @w{@code{sklist_Remove(@var{skl}, 0)}}, this function may
only be called after a call to @w{@code{sklist_Find}} in which the
@var{record} was non-zero, and there must have been no intervening skip
list search operations (@w{@code{sklist_Insert}},
@w{@code{sklist_Remove}}, @w{@code{sklist_CleanRemove}}, and
@w{@code{sklist_Find}}).  Note that a call to such a function on
@emph{any} skip list invalidates the ``recorded'' information for
@emph{all} skip lists.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void *} sklist_First (@w{struct sklist *@var{skl}})
Returns the first element of @var{skl}, or 0 if @var{skl} is empty.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void *} sklist_Next (@w{struct sklist *@var{skl}}, @w{const void *@var{elt}})
Returns the next element in @var{skl} after @var{elt} (which must be a
non-zero pointer obtained earlier from @var{skl}).
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro {} sklist_FOREACH (@w{struct sklist *@var{skl}}, @w{@var{t}}, @w{@var{v}})
Replaces the @w{@code{for (@dots{})}} at the top of a loop that iterates
over the elements of @var{skl} in order; @var{t} is the type of an
element in the Sklist; and @var{v} is the name of a variable of type
@w{@code{@var{t} *}}.  Example:

@example
@group
struct foo *f;

sklist_FOREACH(skl, struct foo, f) @{
    printf("bar field of next element is %s\n", f->bar);
@}
@end group
@end example

The expansion of this macro computes the next element in the Sklist from
the current element at the end of each loop iteration.  This means that
the loop body must not remove the current element from the Sklist;
otherwise, the ``next'' computation will yield garbage.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro {} sklist_FOREACH2 (@w{struct sklist *@var{skl}}, @w{@var{t}}, @w{@var{v}}, @w{@var{w}})
Like @w{@code{sklist_FOREACH}}, but allows the loop body to remove the
current Sklist element.  The caller passes the name of an additional
variable of type @w{@code{@var{t} *}}, @var{w}.  The ``next''
computation takes place at the @emph{top} of each loop and @var{w} holds
a pointer to the next element.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void} sklist_Map (@w{struct sklist *@var{skl}}, @w{void (*@var{fn})(void *, void *)}, @w{void *@var{data}})
For each element of @var{skl}, invoke @var{fn}, passing a pointer to the
element and @var{data} as arguments.  The function @var{fn} should not
alter @var{skl} (with respect to which elements are in it), but may
alter the contents of individual elements.

Elements of @var{skl} are traversed in order from first to last.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void sklist_Destroy (@w{struct sklist *@var{skl}})
Releases the memory associated with @var{skl}.  If the elements of
@var{skl} have privately-allocated resources, those resources should be
released prior to calling this function (presumably in a
@w{@code{sklist_FOREACH}} loop), or @w{@code{sklist_CleanDestroy}}
should be used.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void} sklist_CleanDestroy (@w{struct sklist *@var{skl}}, @w{void (*@var{final})(void *)})
Like @w{@code{sklist_Destroy(@var{skl})}}, but first calls @var{final}
on a pointer to each element of @var{skl} (presumably as a destructor).
@end deftypefn

@node Prqueue, Dpipe, Sklist, Top
@chapter Prqueue

@cindex priority queue
A Prqueue is a priority queue, implemented as a @dfn{heap}-style binary
tree atop a Glist.  As such, many of the same rules and caveats as in
Glists and Dlists apply:  one data type per Prqueue; data elements are
@emph{copied} into the Prqueue's private space; and pointers into
Prqueues can become invalid if a @w{@code{prqueue_Add}} causes a
@code{realloc} of the Prqueue's private memory.  @xref{Glist}.

@cindex comparison operator
@cindex ordering
When a Prqueue is set up, it is given a pointer to an int-returning
function that orders the Prqueue's elements according to some criterion.
The element that is ``lightest'' in this ordering ``bubbles up'' to be
the @dfn{head} of the Prqueue.  Only the head of a Prqueue can be
accessed, but it can always be found in constant time.  Adding and
removing elements from a Prqueue are O(log @var{n}) operations, where
@var{n} is the number of elements in in Prqueue.

@tindex struct prqueue
@deftypefn Function void prqueue_Init (@w{struct prqueue *@var{p}}, @w{int (*@var{compare})(void *, void *)}, @w{int @var{eltsize}}, @w{int @var{growsize}})
Initializes the @w{@code{struct prqueue}} pointed to by @var{p}.  The
comparison function @var{compare} will be used to compare pairs of
elements when adding or removing, and should return an integer less
than, equal to, or greater than zero depending on whether its first
argument is to be considered heavier than, equal to, or lighter than its
second argument.  (The element that compares @emph{lightest} according
to this function will bubble up to the head of the Prqueue.)  The size
of an element of the Prqueue is @var{eltsize}, and when the Prqueue is
full, an attempt to add another element will cause the Prqueue to be
expanded by @var{growsize} uninitialized entries.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int prqueue_EmptyP (@w{struct prqueue *@var{p}})
Yields zero if @var{p} is non-empty, non-zero otherwise.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro {void *} prqueue_Head (@w{struct prqueue *@var{p}})
Yields a pointer to the top element of @var{p}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void prqueue_Add (@w{struct prqueue *@var{p}}, @w{void *@var{elt}})
Adds to @var{p} the element pointed to by @var{elt}.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void prqueue_Remove (@w{struct prqueue *@var{p}})
Removes the head element from @var{p}.  The next lightest element
(according to the comparison @var{compare} provided to
@w{@code{prqueue_Init}}) becomes the new head of the Prqueue.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void prqueue_Destroy (@w{struct prqueue *@var{p}})
Releases the memory associated with @var{p}.  If the elements of @var{p}
have privately-allocated resources (such as memory or file descriptors),
those resources should be released (presumably by repeatedly calling
@w{@code{prqueue_Head}} and @w{@code{prqueue_Remove}} to get at each element
until the Prqueue is empty) prior to calling this function, or
@w{@code{prqueue_CleanDestroy}} should be used.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void} prqueue_CleanDestroy (@w{struct prqueue *@var{p}}, @w{void (*@var{final})(void *)})
Like @w{@code{prqueue_Destroy(@var{p})}}, but first calls @var{final} on
a pointer to each element of @var{p} (presumably as a destructor).
@end deftypefn

@node Dpipe, Miscellaneous, Prqueue, Top
@chapter Dpipe

@cindex data pipe
@cindex pipe
A Dpipe is a buffered data pipe (a @sc{Fifo}) at one ``end'' of which
bytes are written and from the other ``end'' of which the bytes can be
read.  Unlike a Unix interprocess pipe, reading and writing cannot occur
in parallel, so every write must be buffered before the written data can
be read back out.  The internal buffer of a Dpipe grows dynamically, so
no write on a Dpipe will ever block.

@cindex writer
@cindex reader
@cindex autoflushing
A Dpipe can have associated with it a @dfn{reader}, a @dfn{writer},
both, or neither.  The reader is a function which will read bytes from a
Dpipe upon demand, emptying its internal buffer.  The writer is a
function that will supply bytes to a Dpipe upon demand.  The reader is
invoked by the function @w{@code{dpipe_Flush}} and also by
@w{@code{dpipe_Write}}, @w{@code{dpipe_Put}}, and
@w{@code{dpipe_Putchar}} if @dfn{autoflushing} is enabled (to prevent
the internal buffer from growing too large).  The writer is invoked by
@w{@code{dpipe_Read}} and also by @w{@code{dpipe_Get}} and
@w{@code{dpipe_Getchar}} when too few bytes are available in the buffer
to satisfy the pending read request.

The association of a reader or a writer with a Dpipe does not prevent
other callers from writing to or reading from the Dpipe.

Dpipes can be used to abstract stream-based communication, including
between processes.  However, it is not possible for two processes to
manipulate a Dpipe directly, due to the lack of a locking mechanism to
prevent simultaneous accesses from clobbering the data structure.
Instead, isolate the interprocess communication at one end of the Dpipe,
for example by having the Dpipe's reader or writer communicate through
an ordinary Unix pipe with a subprocess.

@menu
* Basic Dpipe functions::       
* Dpipe block operations::      
* Dpipelines::                  
@end menu

@node Basic Dpipe functions, Dpipe block operations, Dpipe, Dpipe
@section Basic Dpipe functions

@tindex struct dpipe
@deftypefn Function void dpipe_Init (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}}, @w{void (*@var{rd})(struct dpipe *, void *)}, @w{void *@var{rddata}}, @w{void (*@var{wr})(struct dpipe *, void *)}, @w{void *@var{wrdata}}, @w{int @var{autoflush}})
Initializes the @w{@code{struct dpipe}} pointed to by @var{dp}.  The
function @var{rd} is the Dpipe's reader, and @var{rddata} is its callback
data.  The function @var{wr} is the Dpipe's writer, and @var{wrdata} is
its callback data.  Finally, @var{autoflush} controls whether
autoflushing is enabled for this Dpipe.

When @w{@code{dpipe_Read}} or @w{@code{dpipe_Getchar}} is called on the
Dpipe and the Dpipe's buffer is empty, then if @var{wr} is non-zero, it
is invoked with @var{dp} as its first argument and @var{wrdata} as its
second.  It is expected to write some bytes into @var{dp} (using
@w{@code{dpipe_Write}}, @w{@code{dpipe_Putchar}}, or
@w{@code{dpipe_Put}}) or to close it (using @w{@code{dpipe_Close}}).
Unlike prior versions of the Dpipe library, writer functions are no
longer required to perform one of these actions on every call.  Instead,
the Dpipe code will automatically repeat calls to @var{wr} until one of
the conditions is satisfied.

When @w{@code{dpipe_Read}} or @w{@code{dpipe_Getchar}} is called on the
Dpipe and the Dpipe's buffer is empty, and if @var{wr} is 0, then the
exception @w{@code{dpipe_err_NoWriter}} is raised.

When @w{@code{dpipe_Flush}} is called on the Dpipe and @var{rd} is
non-zero, it is invoked repeatedly with @var{dp} as its first
argument and @var{rddata} as its second, until no bytes remain in the
Dpipe's buffer.  Each call to @var{rd} is expected to read one or more
bytes out of the Dpipe.@footnote{When @w{@code{dpipe_Flush}} is called
on the Dpipe and @var{rd} @emph{is} 0, then the exception
@w{@code{dpipe_err_NoReader}} is raised.}  See @w{@code{dpipe_Flush}}
for an important recommendation concerning reader functions.

The equivalent of a @w{@code{dpipe_Flush}} also occurs when writing to a
Dpipe if @var{autoflush} is non-zero; in that case, the flush occurs
each time the Dpipe's internal buffer reaches a certain fixed limit.
(If @var{rd} is 0, @var{autoflush} is ignored.)

@tindex dpipe_Callback_t
The convenience type @w{@code{dpipe_Callback_t}}, defined as

@example
@group
typedef void (*dpipe_Callback_t)(struct dpipe *,
                                 void *);
@end group
@end example

@noindent
corresponds to the type of the callbacks @var{wr} and @var{rd}.
@end deftypefn

@cindex end of file
@findex dpipe_err_NoWriter
@deftypefn Function int dpipe_Read (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}}, @w{char *@var{buf}}, @w{int @var{n}})
Read from @var{dp} into @var{buf} at most @var{n} bytes.  Returns the
actual number of bytes read, which will only be less than @var{n} if
end-of-file is reached.  End-of-file is reached when all bytes written
to the Dpipe have been read, and the Dpipe has been closed with
@w{@code{dpipe_Close}}.

If @var{n} is greater than the number of bytes in the Dpipe's buffer,
necessitating a call to the Dpipe's writer, and the Dpipe has no writer,
then no bytes are read and the exception @w{@code{dpipe_err_NoWriter}}
is raised.  Note, however, that in this case, portions of @var{buf} may
still have been overwritten.  This function may also raise the
@w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception (in the case that an attempt to
read causes a writer function to be called).
@end deftypefn

@findex dpipe_err_Closed
@deftypefn Function void dpipe_Write (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}}, @w{const char *@var{buf}}, @w{int @var{n}})
Write to @var{dp} from @var{buf} exactly @var{n} bytes.  If autoflushing
is enabled for the Dpipe, then the Dpipe's reader may be called every so
often to keep the internal buffer below a certain fixed limit.
Otherwise, all @var{n} bytes are buffered.  Dpipe buffering is dynamic,
so @var{n} is limited only by your platform's memory capacity, or your
good sense, whichever comes first.  Attempting to write data to a Dpipe
on which @w{@code{dpipe_Close}} has been called raises the
@w{@code{dpipe_err_Closed}} exception.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@findex dpipe_EOF
@deftypefn Function int dpipe_Getchar (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}})
Read and return the next character from @var{dp}.  If @var{dp} is at
end-of-file, return the constant @w{@code{dpipe_EOF}}.

This function may raise the @w{@code{dpipe_err_NoWriter}} exception.
This function may also raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception
(in the case that an attempt to read causes a writer function to be
called).
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dpipe_Putchar (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}}, @w{int @var{ch}})
Write to @var{dp} the single character @var{ch}.  It is an error to
write data to a Dpipe on which @w{@code{dpipe_Close}} has been called.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dpipe_Unread (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}}, @w{const char *@var{buf}}, @w{int @var{n}})
Pushes back onto @var{dp} from @var{buf} @var{n} bytes, as if they
hadn't been read in the first place.  It is possible to unread data on a
closed Dpipe or one that is at end-of-file.

Note that

@example
@group
dpipe_Unread(dp, "abcd", 4);
@end group
@end example

@noindent
is the same as

@example
@group
dpipe_Unread(dp, "cd", 2);
dpipe_Unread(dp, "ab", 2);
@end group
@end example

@noindent
and that the next four bytes read from the Dpipe will be @w{@code{"abcd"}}.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dpipe_Ungetchar (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}}, @w{int @var{ch}})
Pushes back onto @var{dp} the single character @var{ch}.  It is possible
to unread data on a closed Dpipe or one that is at end-of-file.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {int} dpipe_Peekchar (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}})
Read and return the next character from @var{dp} without removing it
from the stream.  If @var{dp} is at end-of-file, return the constant
@w{@code{dpipe_EOF}}.

This function may raise the @w{@code{dpipe_err_NoWriter}} exception.
This function may also raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception
(in the case that an attempt to peek ahead causes a writer function to
be called).
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int dpipe_Ready (@w{const struct dpipe *@var{dp}})
Returns the number of bytes already buffered for reading in @var{dp}.
Put another way, this is the number of bytes that can be read without
necessitating a call to the Dpipe's writer.  This is a lower bound on
the number of bytes ready for reading; the actual number of readable
bytes remaining in the Dpipe may be (much) higher, since a call to the
Dpipe's writer (if it has one) may produce more data.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {int} dpipe_Eof (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}})
Returns non-zero when @var{dp} is at end-of-file, zero otherwise.

@strong{Warning.}  This function may yield a ``false negative'' in some
cases; that is, it may return 0 when @var{dp} really is at end-of-file.
The ambiguous case is described under @w{@code{dpipe_StrictEof}}
(@i{q.v.}), which is like @w{@code{dpipe_Eof}} but takes a different
approach to addressing the ambiguity.  In short, the ambiguity arises
when @var{dp} is empty and not yet closed.  If a writer function exists,
it can be called to see whether @var{dp} is about to close, and that's
what @w{@code{dpipe_Eof}} does (using @w{@code{dpipe_Peekchar}}).

Since this function may force a call to the writer, this function may
raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function int dpipe_StrictEof (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}})
Returns non-zero when @var{dp} is at end-of-file, zero otherwise.

@strong{Warning.}  This function may raise the
@w{@code{dpipe_err_NoWriter}} exception.  Here's why: A Dpipe is
definitely at end-of-file when no bytes remain in its buffer and when
its internal ``closed'' flag is set (by a prior call to
@w{@code{dpipe_Close}}).  Similarly, a Dpipe is definitely @emph{not} at
end-of-file when any bytes remain in its buffer.  But suppose its buffer
is empty and the ``closed'' flag isn't set; is the Dpipe at end-of-file
or not?  If the Dpipe has a writer function, the next call to it might
close the Dpipe without adding any more bytes; in that case, the answer
is ``yes,'' the Dpipe is at end-of-file.  But the writer might also
supply some bytes, in which case the answer is ``no,'' and there's no
way to tell until a call to the writer has been forced.  Now suppose
that the buffer is empty @emph{and} the ``closed'' flag isn't set
@emph{and} the Dpipe has no writer function: is the Dpipe at
end-of-file?  (In this case, @w{@code{dpipe_Eof}} simply says ``no'' and
risks a false negative.)  There is literally no way for
@w{@code{dpipe_StrictEof}} to know; so by raising an exception,
@w{@code{dpipe_StrictEof}} effectively says, ``I don't know, do you?''
Note that this exception can never be raised when @var{dp} has a writer
function.

Since this function forces a call to the writer (in the case described
above) using @w{@code{dpipe_Peekchar}}, this function may also raise the
@w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@findex dpipe_err_NoReader
@deftypefn Function void dpipe_Flush (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}})
Flush @var{dp}.  Repeatedly calls the Dpipe's reader until no bytes
remain in the Dpipe's internal buffer.  If the Dpipe has no reader, raises
the exception @w{@code{dpipe_err_NoReader}}.  It is possible to flush a
Dpipe that has been closed.

When a Dpipe has both a reader and a writer, calling
@w{@code{dpipe_Flush}} will call the reader which might wind up invoking
the writer as well (via @w{@code{dpipe_Read}}, @w{@code{dpipe_Get}}, or
@w{@code{dpipe_Getchar}}).  Since the goal of @w{@code{dpipe_Flush}} is
to empty the Dpipe's buffer, it is undesirable for the reader to attempt
to read so many bytes that the writer is invoked, which will simply
place more bytes in the Dpipe's buffer.  For that reason, the reader
might want to limit itself to reading no more than
@w{@code{dpipe_Ready(@var{dp})}} bytes; but it must read at least one
byte (unless @var{dp} is at end of file [which sometimes can't be known,
see @w{@code{dpipe_Eof}}]), and @w{@code{dpipe_Ready}} could return 0.
The consequence of reading more than @w{@code{dpipe_Ready}} bytes
(forcing a call to the writer) is simply that the size of the internal
buffer will fluctuate before emptying.

Note that Dpipes contain a preventive mechanism without which
@w{@code{dpipe_Flush}} could invoke the reader, which could invoke the
writer, which could (if autoflushing is enabled) invoke
@w{@code{dpipe_Flush}} and the reader recursively.  The mechanism simply
makes @w{@code{dpipe_Flush}} a no-op any time a read is in progress.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dpipe_Pump (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}})
Pump all the data through @var{dp}.  This function is only for Dpipes
that have both a reader and a writer function.  It works by repeatedly
calling @w{@code{dpipe_Get}} (to get data from the writer function),
then @w{@code{dpipe_Unget}} (to put the newly-read data back into the
Dpipe), then @w{@code{dpipe_Flush}} (to send the data to the reader
function).  This cycle repeats until end-of-file is reached on the
Dpipe.

This function may raise the @w{@code{dpipe_err_NoWriter}} or
@w{@code{dpipe_err_NoReader}} exceptions if called on a Dpipe without
both a reader and a writer function.  This function may also raise the
@w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exceptionor.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dpipe_Close (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}})
Close @var{dp}.  Called to indicate that the writer has no more data to
write to the Dpipe.  When the reader has exhausted the reading buffer
after a Dpipe has been closed, the writer is not called to add data to
the Dpipe; instead, the Dpipe is said to be at end-of-file.

If autoflush is enabled for @var{dp} and @var{dp} has a reader function,
then @w{@code{dpipe_Close}} flushes @var{dp} via a call to
@w{@code{dpipe_Flush}}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro {void *} dpipe_wrdata (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}})
Yields the callback data for @var{dp}'s writer function (e.g., to
finalize it prior to a @w{@code{dpipe_Destroy}}), which was specified in
@w{@code{dpipe_Init}}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro {void *} dpipe_rddata (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}})
Yields the callback data for @var{dp}'s reader function (e.g., to
finalize it prior to a @w{@code{dpipe_Destroy}}), which was specified in
@w{@code{dpipe_Init}}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dpipe_Destroy (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}})
Releases the memory associated with @var{dp}.  It is not necessary to
close @var{dp} before destroying it.
@end deftypefn

@node Dpipe block operations, Dpipelines, Basic Dpipe functions, Dpipe
@section Dpipe block operations

@cindex donate
When writing normally to a Dpipe, data is copied from the caller's
buffer into the Dpipe's internal storage.  Internally, the Dpipe places
the copied data into a block of memory allocated by @code{malloc}.  It
can be much more efficient if the caller is able to @dfn{donate} such a
block containing the data to be written.  Donating a block means the
caller relinquishes control over the buffer containing the data to be
written; that buffer must have been created with @code{malloc}.  The
Dpipe then uses that block directly, with the data already in it, as its
internal storage rather than create more storage of its own, then have
to copy the data into it.

When reading from a Dpipe, a similar optimization is available.  If the
caller is able to accept a pointer to a Dpipe-internal @code{malloc}
block (whose size cannot be known in advance), there is no need for
copying data out of the Dpipe, then destroying the block with
@code{free}.

@deftypefn Function {void} dpipe_Put (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}}, @w{char *@var{buf}}, @w{int @var{n}})
Like @w{@code{dpipe_Write}}, but avoids copying by linking @var{buf}
directly into the internal storage of @var{dp}.  The buffer @var{buf}
must be a @code{malloc}-allocated block of at least @var{n} bytes, and
@var{n} must be at least 1.  The caller relinquishes ownership of
@var{buf} and must perform no further operations with it (including
@code{free}---the Dpipe will take care of disposing of the space at the
proper time).

Like @w{@code{dpipe_Write}}, if autoflushing is enabled for @var{dp},
then the Dpipe's reader may be called via @w{@code{dpipe_Flush}}; also,
this function can raise the @w{@code{dpipe_err_Closed}} and
@w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exceptions.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {int} dpipe_Get (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}}, @w{char **@var{bufp}})
Like @w{@code{dpipe_Read}}, but assigns to @w{@code{*@var{bufp}}} the
address of a @code{malloc}-allocated block containing one or more bytes
from @var{dp}'s internal storage.  Return value is the number of bytes
contained in @w{@code{*@var{bufp}}}.  If @var{dp} is at end-of-file,
0 is returned and @w{@code{*@var{bufp}}} will also be 0.  If @var{dp}'s
internal buffer is empty but it has not yet been closed with
@w{@code{dpipe_Close}}, then the writer is called to supply one or more
bytes, but if @var{dp} has no writer, then the exception
@w{@code{dpipe_err_NoWriter}} is raised.

The Dpipe relinquishes its ownership of the @code{malloc} block it
returns, meaning, among other things, that the caller must be prepared
to dispose of it at some point using @code{free} (or donate it to a
future @w{@code{dpipe_Put}}, or possibly @w{@code{dynstr_InitFrom}}
[@pxref{Dynstr}]).

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception (in
the case that an attempt to read causes a writer function to be called).
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {void} dpipe_Unget (@w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}}, @w{char *@var{buf}}, @w{int @var{n}})
Like @w{@code{dpipe_Unread}}, but @var{buf} must be a @code{malloc}
block of at least @var{n} bytes which the caller relinquishes.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@node Dpipelines,  , Dpipe block operations, Dpipe
@section Dpipelines

@cindex dpipeline
@cindex filter
This section discusses @dfn{Dpipelines}, a convenience facility using
Dpipes.  A Dpipeline is a sequence of Dpipes, each feeding its output
into the next one's input, via a @dfn{filter} function.  The filter
functions in a Dpipeline are called on demand.  Each time one is
invoked, it is required to read at least one byte from its source Dpipe
@emph{or} write at least one byte to its destination Dpipe @emph{or}
close its destination Dpipe.

@cindex reading end
@cindex writing end
Every non-empty Dpipeline has an ordinary Dpipe at its source, or
@dfn{writing end}, and an ordinary Dpipe at its destination, or
@dfn{reading end}.  Callers are free to obtain handles to these Dpipes
(via @w{@code{dpipeline_wrEnd}} and @w{@code{dpipeline_rdEnd}}) and use them in
an ordinary way.@footnote{Care is only required in calling
@w{@code{dpipe_Close}}.  A filter function should close its destination
Dpipe when it is out of data to write.  Apart from that,
@w{@code{dpipe_Close}} should only be called on the writing end.}

@tindex struct dpipeline
@deftypefn Function void dpipeline_Init (@w{struct dpipeline *@var{dpl}}, @w{void (*@var{rd})(struct dpipe *, void *)}, @w{void *@var{rddata}}, @w{void (*@var{wr})(struct dpipe *, void *)}, @w{void *@var{wrdata}})
Initializes the Dpipeline pointed to by @var{dpl}.  The reader function
for the rightmost Dpipe is @var{rd}, and its callback data is
@var{rddata}.  The writer function for the leftmost Dpipe is @var{wr},
and its callback data is @var{wrdata}.  Each of @var{rd} and @var{wr}
may be 0.  If @var{rd} is non-zero, autoflush is enabled for all Dpipes
in the Dpipeline.

A newly-initialized Dpipeline is empty and contains no filters, no
reading end, and no writing end.
@end deftypefn

@findex dpipe_err_Pipeline
@deftypefn Function void dpipeline_Prepend (@w{struct dpipeline *@var{dpl}}, @w{void (*@var{filter})(struct dpipe *, struct dpipe *, void *)}, @w{void *@var{filterdata}}, @w{void (*@var{finalize})(dpipeline_Filter_t, void *)})
Prepend a filter to @var{dpl}.  The new filter function is @var{filter}
which, when invoked, is passed a source Dpipe, a destination Dpipe, and
@var{filterdata}.  The function @var{finalize}, if non-zero, is invoked
during @w{@code{dpipeline_Destroy}} and is passed @var{filter} and
@var{filterdata} (for cleanup, if necessary).  There must not be a
``foreign'' Dpipe prepended to @var{dpl} (see
@w{@code{dpipeline_PrependDpipe}}, below); if there is, the exception
@w{@code{dpipe_err_Pipeline}} is raised.

The source Dpipe is newly created and becomes the writing end of the
Dpipeline; its writer is @var{wr} as passed to @w{@code{dpipeline_Init}}
(with @var{wrdata} as its callback data).  The destination Dpipe is the
former writing end of the Dpipeline, or is newly created (and becomes
the reading end of the Dpipeline, with @var{rd} and @var{rddata}, as
passed to @w{@code{dpipeline_Init}}, as its reader and callback data) if the
Dpipeline was empty.

@tindex dpipeline_Filter_t
The convenience type @w{@code{dpipeline_Filter_t}}, defined as

@example
typedef void (*dpipeline_Filter_t)(struct dpipe *,
                                   struct dpipe *,
                                   void *);
@end example

@noindent
corresponds to the type of the filter function @var{filter}.

@tindex dpipeline_Finalize_t
The convenience type @w{@code{dpipeline_Finalize_t}}, defined as

@example
@group
typedef void (*dpipeline_Finalize_t)(dpipeline_Filter_t,
                                     void *);
@end group
@end example

@noindent
corresponds to the type of the finalizing function @var{finalize}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dpipeline_Append (@w{struct dpipeline *@var{dpl}}, @w{void (*@var{filter})(struct dpipe *, struct dpipe *, void *)}, @w{void *@var{filterdata}}, @w{void (*@var{finalize})(dpipeline_Filter_t, void *)})
Append a filter to @var{dpl}.  The new filter function is @var{filter}
which, when invoked, is passed a source Dpipe, a destination Dpipe, and
@var{filterdata}.  The function @var{finalize}, if non-zero, is invoked
during @w{@code{dpipeline_Destroy}} and is passed @var{filter} and
@var{filterdata} (for cleanup, if necessary).  There must not be a
``foreign'' Dpipe appended to @var{dpl} (see
@w{@code{dpipeline_AppendDpipe}}, below); if there is, the exception
@w{@code{dpipe_err_Pipeline}} is raised.

The destination Dpipe is newly created and becomes the reading end of
the Dpipeline; its reader is @var{rd} as passed to @w{@code{dpipeline_Init}}
(with @var{rddata} as its callback data).  The source Dpipe is the
former reading end of the Dpipeline, or is newly created (and becomes
the writing end of the Dpipeline, with @var{wr} and @var{wrdata}, as
passed to @w{@code{dpipeline_Init}}, as its writer and callback data) if the
Dpipeline was empty.

The convenience type @w{@code{dpipeline_Filter_t}}, defined as

@example
typedef void (*dpipeline_Filter_t)(struct dpipe *,
                                   struct dpipe *,
                                   void *);
@end example

@noindent
corresponds to the type of the filter function @var{filter}.

The convenience type @w{@code{dpipeline_Finalize_t}}, defined as

@example
typedef void (*dpipeline_Finalize_t)(dpipeline_Filter_t, void *);
@end example

@noindent
corresponds to the type of the finalizing function @var{finalize}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int dpipeline_Length (@w{struct dpipeline *@var{dpl}})
Yields the number of filters in @var{dpl}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dpipeline_PrependDpipe (@w{struct dpipeline *@var{dpl}}, @w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}})
Prepend to the Dpipeline @var{dpl} the Dpipe @var{dp}, making @var{dp}
the new writing end.  There must be at least one filter in @var{dpl}; if
there isn't, the exception @w{@code{dpipe_err_Pipeline}} is raised.  If
@var{dp} has a reader and reader data, they are cached and overwritten
(to be restored to the Dpipe upon @w{@code{dpipeline_UnprependDpipe}} or
@w{@code{dpipeline_Destroy}}).  If @var{dpl} has a writer, it is superseded,
and its writer data is not used (but can still be accessed with
@w{@code{dpipeline_wrdata(@var{dpl})}}).  The autoflush status of @var{dp}
does not change, though it will not affect the autoflush status of the
other Dpipes in @var{dpl}.  While @var{dp} is attached to @var{dpl}, do
not use @w{@code{dpipe_rddata(@var{dp})}}, since it will contain
pipeline-private data.

@cindex foreign dpipe
The new writing end is termed a @dfn{foreign Dpipe}.  When @var{dpl} is
destroyed (with @w{@code{dpipeline_Destroy}}), @var{dp} will @emph{not} be
automatically destroyed.  Note that the reader and reader data of
@var{dp}, if any, are inaccessible while @var{dp} is attached to
@var{dpl}.

It is not possible to call @w{@code{dpipeline_Prepend}} on a Dpipeline to
which a foreign Dpipe has been prepended.  The prepended Dpipe must
remain the writing end of the Dpipeline.

It @emph{is} possible to call @w{@code{dpipeline_PrependDpipe}} more than
once on a given Dpipeline.  Each call @emph{replaces} the previous
writing end with the new Dpipe.  The previous writing end has its reader
and reader data restored, but it is not returned or saved anywhere, so
if necessary, a pointer to it should be obtained (with
@w{@code{dpipeline_wrEnd}}) prior to replacing it.  (If the writing end of a
Dpipeline is not foreign, then the Dpipeline will manage that Dpipe
itself.  Foreign writing ends, however, are the responsibility of the
caller.)

It is possible to connect two Dpipelines like this:

@example
dpipeline_PrependDpipe(@var{dpl2}, dpipeline_rdEnd(@var{dpl1}));
@end example

@noindent
which will cause @var{dpl1} to feed into @var{dpl2}.  Remember, though,
that this causes the reader and reader data of
@w{@code{dpipeline_rdEnd(@var{dpl1})}} to be hidden, and that
@w{@code{dpipeline_Destroy(@var{dpl2})}} will not reclaim
@w{@code{dpipeline_rdEnd(@var{dpl1})}} (nor would you want it to).

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dpipeline_AppendDpipe (@w{struct dpipeline *@var{dpl}}, @w{struct dpipe *@var{dp}})
Append to the Dpipeline @var{dpl} the Dpipe @var{dp}, making @var{dp}
the new reading end.  There must be at least one filter in @var{dpl}; if
there isn't, the exception @w{@code{dpipe_err_Pipeline}} is raised.  If
@var{dp} has a writer and writer data, they are cached and overwritten
(to be restored to the Dpipe upon @w{@code{dpipeline_UnappendDpipe}} or
@w{@code{dpipeline_Destroy}}).  If @var{dpl} has a reader, it is superseded,
and its reader data is not used (but can still be accessed with
@w{@code{dpipeline_rddata(@var{dpl})}}).  The autoflush status of @var{dp}
does not change, though it will not affect the autoflush status of the
other Dpipes in @var{dpl}.  While @var{dp} is attached to @var{dpl}, do
not use @w{@code{dpipe_wrdata(@var{dp})}}, since it will contain
pipeline-private data.

The new reading end is termed a @dfn{foreign Dpipe}.  When @var{dpl} is
destroyed (with @w{@code{dpipeline_Destroy}}), @var{dp} will @emph{not} be
automatically destroyed.  Note that the writer and writer data of
@var{dp}, if any, are inaccessible while @var{dp} is attached to
@var{dpl}.

It is not possible to call @w{@code{dpipeline_Append}} on a Dpipeline to
which a foreign Dpipe has been appended.  The appended Dpipe must remain
the reading end of the Dpipeline.

It @emph{is} possible to call @w{@code{dpipeline_AppendDpipe}} more than
once on a given Dpipeline.  Each call @emph{replaces} the previous
reading end with the new Dpipe.  The previous reading end has its writer
and writer data restored, but it is not returned or saved anywhere, so
if necessary, a pointer to it should be obtained (with
@w{@code{dpipeline_rdEnd}}) prior to replacing it.  (If the reading end of a
Dpipeline is not foreign, then the Dpipeline will manage that Dpipe
itself.  Foreign reading ends, however, are the responsibility of the
caller.)

It is possible to connect two Dpipelines like this:

@example
dpipeline_AppendDpipe(@var{dpl1}, dpipeline_wrEnd(@var{dpl2}));
@end example

@noindent
which will cause @var{dpl1} to feed into @var{dpl2}.  Remember, though,
that this causes the writer and writer data of
@w{@code{dpipeline_wrEnd(@var{dpl2})}} to be forgotten, and that
@w{@code{dpipeline_Destroy(@var{dpl1})}} will not reclaim
@w{@code{dpipeline_wrEnd(@var{dpl2})}} (nor would you want it to).

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {struct dpipe *} dpipeline_UnprependDpipe (@w{struct dpipeline *@var{dpl}})
Removes and returns the foreign Dpipe from @var{dpl} that was prepended
by @w{@code{dpipeline_PrependDpipe}}.  If the writing end of @var{dpl} is
not foreign, the exception @w{@code{dpipe_err_Pipeline}} is raised.

The foreign Dpipe has its reader and reader data restored, and the
Dpipeline has its writer and writer data restored.  The foreign Dpipe is
replaced (in the Dpipeline) with a new non-foreign Dpipe.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {struct dpipe *} dpipeline_UnappendDpipe (@w{struct dpipeline *@var{dpl}})
Removes and returns the foreign Dpipe from @var{dpl} that was appended
by @w{@code{dpipeline_AppendDpipe}}.  If the reading end of @var{dpl} is not
foreign, the exception @w{@code{dpipe_err_Pipeline}} is raised.

The foreign Dpipe has its writer and writer data restored, and the
Dpipeline has its reader and reader data restored.  The foreign Dpipe is
replaced (in the Dpipeline) with a new non-foreign Dpipe.

This function may raise the @w{@code{strerror(ENOMEM)}} exception.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {struct dpipe *} dpipeline_wrEnd (@w{struct dpipeline *@var{dpl}})
Returns the Dpipe at the ``writing end'' of @var{dpl}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function {struct dpipe *} dpipeline_rdEnd (@w{struct dpipeline *@var{dpl}})
Returns the Dpipe at the ``reading end'' of @var{dpl}.

If a Dpipeline has both a reader function and a writer function, it is
possible to ``pump'' all the data through it by calling
@w{@code{dpipe_Pump(dpipeline_rdEnd(@var{dpl}))}}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro {void *} dpipeline_wrdata (@w{struct dpipeline *@var{dpl}})
Yields the writer callback data specified in @w{@code{dpipeline_Init}}.
This is the same as @w{@code{dpipe_wrdata(dpipeline_wrEnd(@var{dpl}))}},
unless a foreign Dpipe has been prepended with
@w{@code{dpipeline_PrependDpipe}}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro {void *} dpipeline_rddata (@w{struct dpipeline *@var{dpl}})
Yields the reader callback data specified in @w{@code{dpipeline_Init}}.
This is the same as @w{@code{dpipe_rddata(dpipeline_rdEnd(@var{dpl}))}},
unless a foreign Dpipe has been appended with
@w{@code{dpipeline_AppendDpipe}}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Function void dpipeline_Destroy (@w{struct dpipeline *@var{dpl}})
Releases all the memory associated with @var{dpl} (including destroying
all the Dpipes it contains), except for foreign Dpipes.  If the writing
end of @var{dpl} is foreign, its reader and reader data are restored.
If the reading end of @var{dpl} is foreign, its writer and writer data
are restored.
@end deftypefn

@node Miscellaneous, Compiling, Dpipe, Top
@chapter Miscellaneous

@deftypefn Function void safe_bcopy (@w{void *@var{src}}, @w{void *@var{dest}}, @w{int @var{n}})
Copies @var{n} bytes from @var{src} to @var{dest}, correctly handling
overlapping blocks of memory.  This function should only be called when
it is known that the blocks at @var{src} and @var{dest} can overlap (if
@var{src} and @var{dest} point to two separate @code{malloc} blocks, for
example, or if they point inside two seperately-declared structures or
arrays, they @emph{cannot} overlap, so @w{@code{safe_bcopy}} should not be
used).  This function only gets defined if the native @code{bcopy}
cannot handle overlaps.  If it can, then @w{@code{safe_bcopy}} is defined as
a macro in terms of the native @code{bcopy}.  (The macro will use
@code{memcpy} if @code{bcopy} is not available.)
@end deftypefn

@node Compiling, Index, Miscellaneous, Top
@chapter Compiling

To use @sc{Dynadt} in your application, link with the library
@file{libdynadt.a}, and also with @file{libexcept.a}, on which
@sc{Dynadt} depends.  Include one or more of the following header files
depending on which subsystems of @sc{Dynadt} you are using:
@file{glist.h}; @file{dlist.h}; @file{dynstr.h}; @file{intset.h};
@file{hashtab.h}; @file{sklist.h}; @file{prqueue.h}; @file{dpipe.h}.

@node Index,  , Compiling, Top
@unnumbered Index

@printindex fn

@contents

@bye
