\input texinfo @c -*- texinfo -*-
@comment %**start of header (This is for running Texinfo on a region.)
@setfilename regexpr.info
@settitle REGEXPR
@c @finalout
@c @smallbook
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@footnotestyle separate
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex tp cp
@comment %**end of header (This is for running Texinfo on a region.)

@ifinfo
This file documents the programmers' interface to REGEXPR, the freeware
GNU-like regular expression package that is used by Z-Mail.

Software Copyright @copyright{} 1991 Tatu Ylonen, Espoo, Finland.
Documentation Copyright @copyright{} 1995 Z-Code Software.
@end ifinfo

@tex
\def\$#1${{#1}}  % Kluge: collect RCS revision info without $...$
\xdef\manvers{\$Revision: 2.3 $}  % For use in headers, footers too
\xdef\mandate{\$Date: 1995/04/06 02:14:31 $}
@end tex

@titlepage
@title REGEXPR
@subtitle Regular Expression Library for C
@subtitle Manual version $Revision: 2.3 $
@subtitle $Date: 1995/04/06 02:14:31 $
@author Bart Schaefer
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Software Copyright @copyright{} 1991 Tatu Ylonen, Espoo, Finland.
Documentation Copyright @copyright{} 1995 Z-Code Software.
@end titlepage

@node Top, Regular Expressions Overview, (dir), (dir)
@unnumbered Introduction

This document describes the application programmer's interface to the
REGEXPR library package for regular expression searching.

@ifinfo
Manual version:  $Revision: 2.3 $ $Date: 1995/04/06 02:14:31 $
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Regular Expressions Overview::  
* Initializing::                
* Compiling a Pattern::         
* Using Compiled Patterns::  
* Convenience Routines::        
* Index::                       
@end menu

@node Regular Expressions Overview, Initializing, Top, Top
@chapter Regular Expressions Overview

This overview assumes some level of basic computer science knowledge
on the part of the reader.  Only the specifics of this particular regular
expression package are discussed.  If you don't know what a regular
expression is, go get a textbook.

In the text that follows, @dfn{intercharacter space} refers to a position
between two characters in the plain-text string being compared against the
regular expression pattern.  This may include positions at the beginning
or end of the buffer, that is, to the left of the first character or to
the right of the last character.  It does @emph{not} refer to the ASCII
character @samp{ } (a space).

Special tokens (@dfn{escapes}) interpreted in patterns by this regular
expression library:

@table @samp
@item \
Backslash always introduces another character.  If the character that
follows the backslash is another special character, the backslash
causes it to be treated as a normal (plain text) character.  If the
character that follows is not a special character, it may become special;
see ``Special characters that must be preceded with a backslash'' below.

In particular, @samp{\\} @emph{always} must be used to match a plain-text
backslash.

@item ^
Beginning of line.  Matches no characters; instead, it matches
@emph{between} a newline and the first character of the next line, or it
matches before the first character of the string being matched.

@item $
End of line.  Matches no characters; instead, it matches @emph{between}
the last non-newline character of the line and the newline that follows,
or it matches after last character of the string being matched.

@item .
Any single character except a newline.  The simplest wildcard.

@item [@var{set}]
@itemx [^@var{set}]
In the first form, any single character in @var{set}, which may
contain abbreviations for ranges such as @samp{A-Z} (meaning any capital
letter).  In the second form, any single character @emph{not} in
@var{set}.  To include a hyphen (@samp{-}) in @var{set}, it should be
preceded by a backslash (@samp{\}), or must not be the first or last
character (so it's not interpreted as a range).  To include a caret
(@samp{^}) in the first form (@samp{[@var{set}]}), precede it by a
backslash or place it anywhere but in the first position, where it
would cause thep expression to be mistaken for the second form
(@samp{[^@var{set}]}).

@item *
Zero or more occurrences of the immediately preceding pattern.  This
character is treated as plain text if not preceded by another pattern.

Note that in the regular expression @samp{abcd*}, the @samp{*} modifies
@samp{d}, not @samp{abcd}, so this expression matches the characters
@samp{abc} followed by zero or more repetitions of @samp{d} (@samp{abc},
@samp{abcd}, @samp{abcdd}, etc.).  See @samp{\(} and @samp{\)} for
grouping.

@item +
One or more occurrences of the immediately preceding pattern.  Except
that the pattern must appear at least once, this is the same as
@samp{*}; i.e., @samp{abcd+} matches @samp{abcd} and @samp{abcdd} (but
not @samp{abc}).

@item ?
Zero or one occurrence of the immediately preceding pattern; i.e.,
@samp{abcd?} matches @samp{abc} and @samp{abcd} only.
@end table

@heading Special characters that must be preceded with a backslash

@table @samp
@item \|
Alternate patterns.  If the pattern to the left of @samp{\|} does not
match, the pattern to the right is attempted.

Alternation is @emph{not} a modifier like @samp{*} or @samp{+}!!  The
entire subpattern to the left is tried, and then the entire subpattern
to the right.  Example: @samp{abc\|def} matches @samp{abc} or @samp{def}
only.

@item \(@var{subpattern}\)
Pattern grouping.  The entire @var{subpattern} enclosed in @samp{\(} and
@samp{\)} becomes a single pattern for purposes of repetition by the
@samp{*}, @samp{+}, and @samp{?} modifiers.

Substrings matched by subpatterns enclosed in the grouping syntax are
loaded into indexed positions in the @dfn{memory registers} maintained
by the regular expression library.  There are nine such registers;
grouped patterns are numbered 1 through 9, left to right, and matching
substrings are recorded (by starting and ending offset) in the
correspondingly-numbered register.  Example: the pattern
@samp{ab\(cd\|ef\)gh} matches the string @samp{abcdgh}, and records the
position of the substring @samp{cd} in register 1.

Note that when a grouped subpattern is modified by one of the repetition
modifiers, it is @emph{not} loaded into a corresponding register.
Example: the pattern @samp{ab\(cd\|ef\)*gh} matches the string
@samp{abefefcdcdgh}, but nothing is assigned to register 1 because the
grouped subpattern is modified by @samp{*}.

@item \1
@itemx \2
@itemx \3
@itemx @r{@dots{}}
@itemx \9
These special tokens are replaced by strings previously loaded into
``memory registers'' by matching a grouped subpattern.
Example: the pattern @samp{ab\(cd\|ef\)gh\1} matches the string
@samp{abcdghcd} but not @samp{abcdghef}.

@item \w
Word character; shorthand for the set @samp{[a-zA-Z0-9]}.

Note that this is unlike Perl, in that @samp{_} is a word character in
Perl but is @emph{not} a word character here.

@item \W
Not a word character; shorthand for the set @samp{[^a-zA-Z0-9]}.

@item \<
Beginning of word; matches the intercharacter space between any
character not in the set @samp{[a-zA-Z0-9]} and any character in that
set.

@item \>
End of word; matches the intercharacter space between any character in
the set @samp{[a-zA-Z0-9]} and any character not in that set.

@item \b
Word boundary (beginning or end); matches where either of @samp{\<} or
@samp{\>} would match.

@item \B
Not word boundary; matches where neither @samp{\<} nor @samp{\>} would
match.

@item \`
Beginning of buffer; like @samp{^} but only at the beginning of the entire
string, not at the beginning of each embedded line.

@item \'
End of buffer; like @samp{$} but only at the end of the entire string,
not at the end of each embedded line.
@end table

The following additional special tokens are enabled if the package is
compiled with the constant @code{emacs} defined to the C preprocessor:

@table @samp
@item \=
Matches if the offset of the current character is equal to @code{point},
which is a global variable defined outside this module.

@item \s@var{x}
The character @var{x} is a @dfn{syntax code}.  The entry for @var{x} is
looked up in the global table @w{@code{syntax_spec_code}}, which
indicates what should be matched.

@item \S@var{x}
The character @var{x} is a @dfn{syntax code} (see above).
This is the inverse of @samp{\s@var{x}}, matching anything @emph{not}
matched by that.
@end table

@xref{Initializing}, for additional special syntactic tokens that can be
enabled or disabled.

@node Initializing, Compiling a Pattern, Regular Expressions Overview, Top
@chapter Initializing

@deftypefun int re_set_syntax (@w{int @var{syntax}})
This sets the syntax to use and returns the previous syntax.  The syntax
is set globally for all uses of the library, but is referenced only
during compilation of the pattern (@pxref{Compiling a Pattern}).  Thus
it is possible to perform simultaneous searches with two or more
different syntaxes, as long as the patterns have not been recompiled
since the syntax was changed.

The syntax is specified by a bit mask of the following defined bits:

@table @code
@item RE_NO_BK_PARENS
Parentheses are used for grouping subpatterns.  With this syntax set,
parens are always ``special'' and are interpreted as part of the plain
text @emph{only} when ``protected'' by preceding them with a backslash,
e.g. @samp{\(} and @samp{\)}.

The default syntax (without @w{@code{RE_NO_BK_PARENS}}) is for parens to
be treated as plain text, with @samp{\(} and @samp{\)} reserved for
subpattern grouping.

@item RE_NO_BK_VBAR
Vertical bar (@samp{|}) is used for delimiting alternate subpatterns.  With
this syntax set, vertical bar is always ``special'' and is interpreted as
part of the plain text @emph{only} when ``protected'' by preceding it with
a backslash, e.g. @samp{\|}.

The default syntax (without @w{@code{RE_NO_BK_VBAR}}) is for vertical
bar to be treated as plain text, with @samp{\|} reserved for delimiting
alternatives.

@item RE_BK_PLUS_QM
Plus (@samp{+}) indicates one or more occurrences of the preceding
subpattern; question mark (@samp{?}) indicates zero or one occurrence of
the preceding subpattern.  With this syntax set, plus and question mark
are treated as plain text, and are special @emph{only} when ``escaped''
by preceding them with a backslash, e.g. @samp{\+} and @samp{\?}.

The default syntax (without @w{@code{RE_BK_PLUS_QM}}) is for plus and
question mark to always be special, with @samp{\+} and @samp{\?}
required to match plain-text plus and question mark.@footnote{Z-Mail's
@code{pick} command (a.k.a. @code{search}) uses @w{@code{RE_BK_PLUS_QM}}
unless it is invoked as @w{@code{pick -X}}.}

@item RE_TIGHT_VBAR
With this syntax set, vertical bars that delimit alternate subpatterns
bind more tightly than caret (@samp{^}, beginning of line) and dollar
(@samp{$}, end of line).

This should mean that (for example)

@example
^patONE\|patTWO
@end example
is interpreted as
@example
^\(patONE\|patTWO\)
@end example
whereas without this syntax it would be interpreted as
@example
\(^patONE\)\|\(patTWO\)
@end example

@noindent
but neither behavior has been verified.

@item RE_NEWLINE_OR
With this syntax set, a newline appearing in the pattern is treated as
separating alternate patterns, as if it were a vertical bar.

@item RE_CONTEXT_INDEP_OPS
With this syntax set, the special characters @samp{^}, @samp{$},
@samp{?}, @samp{*}, and @samp{+} are special in @emph{all} contexts.
This means that if one of these characters is used at a point in the
pattern where it does not make sense (e.g, placing @samp{^} or @samp{$}
in the middle of a word; placing @samp{*}, @samp{\?} or @samp{\+} at the
beginning of a word), then compiling the pattern is an error.

The default behavior (without @w{@code{RE_CONTEXT_INDEP_OPS}}) is to
treat any special character that occurs out of context as if it were
plain text.

@item RE_ANSI_HEX
This syntax specifies that ANSI character escapes and hexadecimal
sequences be interpreted in the pattern.  In each case the escapes are
replaced by a single character.@footnote{Z-Mail's @code{pick} command
(a.k.a. @code{search}) uses @w{@code{RE_ANSI_HEX}} only when it is invoked
as @w{@code{pick -X}}.}  The ANSI character escapes are as follows:

@table @samp
@item \a
@itemx \A
Audible bell, ASCII value 7.

@item \b
@itemx \B
Backspace, ASCII value 8.

@item \f
@itemx \F
Form feed, ASCII value 12 (decimal).

@item \n
@itemx \N
Line feed, ASCII value 10 (decimal).

@item \r
@itemx \R
Carriage return, ASCII value 13 (decimal).

@item \t
@itemx \T
Horizontal tab, ASCII value 9.

@item \V
Vertical tab, ASCII value 11 (decimal).  (Note that @samp{\v} is pre-empted,
see below.)

@item \x@var{hh}
@itemx \X@var{hh}
A hexadecimal sequence, that is, a four-character string beginning with
@samp{\x} or @samp{\X} followed by two hexadecimal digits (@samp{0-9},
@samp{a-f}).  The entire sequence is replaced by the single character
whose ASCII value is given by the two hex digits @var{hh}.
@end table

This syntax also extends the number of registers (recorded matches of
subpatterns) that can be referenced from 9 to 99.  The syntax for
referencing registers 10-99 is @samp{\v@var{dd}}, where @var{dd} are
two decimal digits (@samp{0-9}).  @emph{However}, as currently compiled,
the library supports no more than 9 registers, so references using
@samp{\v} always generate a pattern compilation error.

@item RE_NO_GNU_EXTENSIONS
With this syntax set, the special patterns @samp{\w}, @samp{\W},
@samp{\<}, @samp{\>}, @samp{\b}, @samp{\B}, @samp{\`}, and @samp{\'} are
@emph{not} recognized.@footnote{Z-Mail's @code{pick} command (a.k.a.
@code{search}) uses @w{@code{RE_NO_GNU_EXTENSIONS}} unless it is invoked
as @w{@code{pick -X}}.}
@end table

The following predefined combinations duplicate the behavior of some common
programs that each use slightly differing regular expression syntax:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{RE_SYNTAX_AWK}
@item @code{RE_SYNTAX_EGREP}
@item @code{RE_SYNTAX_GREP}
@item @code{RE_SYNTAX_EMACS}
@end itemize
@end deftypefun

@node Compiling a Pattern, Using Compiled Patterns, Initializing, Top
@chapter Compiling a Pattern

To speed searching, the library requires that the regular expression be
precompiled into an efficient format stored in the following structure:

@tindex struct re_pattern_buffer
@tindex regexp_t
@example
@group
typedef struct re_pattern_buffer @{
    char *buffer;          /* @r{compiled pattern} */
    int allocated;         /* @r{allocated size of compiled pattern} */
    int used               /* @r{actual length of compiled pattern} */
    char *fastmap;         /* @r{fastmap[ch] true if ch can start pattern} */
    char *translate;       /* @r{translation to apply} */
    char fastmap_accurate; /* @r{true if fastmap is valid} */
    char can_be_null;      /* @r{true if can match empty string} */
    char uses_registers;   /* @r{registers used and must be initialized} */
    char anchor;           /* @r{anchor: 0=none 1=begline 2=begbuf} */
@} *regexp_t;
@end group
@end example

The structure should normally be initialized with all fields zeroed
before calling @w{@code{re_compile_pattern}} to parse the regular
expression.  Some fields may be initialized to other values to change
the behavior of the compilation; this is noted below.

@deftypefun {char *} re_compile_pattern (@w{const char *@var{pattern}}, @w{int @var{pattern_length}}, @w{regexp_t @var{compiled}})
Compile the regexp given by @var{pattern} with length @w{@var{pattern_length}}.
Note that @code{NUL} bytes may appear in the pattern and can be matched
by the library; strings are not treated as @code{NUL}-terminated.

Returns @code{NULL} if the pattern compiled successfully, or an error
message if an error was encountered.

The @code{buffer} field of @var{compiled} must be initialized to a memory
area allocated by @code{malloc} (or to @code{NULL}) before use, and the
@code{allocated} field must be set to the size of the allocated space (or
0 if @code{buffer} is @code{NULL}).

The @code{translate} field must be set to point to a valid translation
table, or to @code{NULL} if no translation is to be done.  A translation
table is a 256-character mapping table which is applied to both the pattern
at compile time and to the string being matched at search time.  It can be
used, for example, to map upper case onto lower case.  The table @emph{must}
have a valid entry for each of the 256 ASCII characters (0-255 decimal).

The @code{fastmap} field must be set to point to a 256-character space
for use as a mapping table, or to @code{NULL} if fast mappings are not
to be used.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun void re_compile_fastmap (@w{regexp_t @var{compiled}})
Computes the ``fastmap'' for the regexp.  For this to have any effect,
the calling program must have initialized the @code{fastmap} field of
@var{compiled} to point to an array of 256 characters.

The fastmap is automatically computed during a search if the @code{fastmap}
field is non-@code{NULL}; this function may be called to precompute the
mapping if that is desired.
@end deftypefun

@node Using Compiled Patterns, Convenience Routines, Compiling a Pattern, Top
@chapter Using Compiled Patterns
@tindex struct re_registers
@tindex regexp_registers_t

Substrings matched by grouped subpatterns (@samp{\(} and @samp{\)}) are
recorded in the @dfn{re_registers} structure, which is defined as:

@example
@group
typedef struct re_registers @{
    int start[RE_NREGS];  /* @r{start offset of region} */
    int end[RE_NREGS];    /* @r{end offset of region} */
@} *regexp_registers_t;
@end group
@end example

@menu
* Searching::                   
* Matching::                    
@end menu

@node Searching, Matching, Using Compiled Patterns, Using Compiled Patterns
@section Searching

@deftypefun int re_search (@w{regexp_t @var{compiled}}, @w{const char *@var{string}}, @w{int @var{size}}, @w{int @var{startpos}}, @w{int @var{range}}, @w{regexp_registers_t @var{regs}})
Search for a substring of @var{string} matching the regular expression
represented by @var{compiled}.  The search begins at @var{startpos} and
is attempted repeatedly for @var{range} positions, extending no farther
than the offset @var{size}.  Positive values of @var{range} indicate
searching forwards from @var{startpos}, and negative values indicate
searching backwards.  As with @code{re_match}, strings are @emph{not}
treated as @code{NUL}-terminated.

Returns the offset of the first match found, or less than zero on any error.
Error values are as for @code{re_match}.

Substrings matched by grouped subpatterns (@samp{\(} and @samp{\)}) are
recorded in the structure pointed to by @var{regs}.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun int re_search_2 (@w{regexp_t @var{compiled}}, @w{const char *@var{string1}}, @w{int @var{size1}}, @w{const char *@var{string2}}, @w{int @var{size2}}, @w{int @var{startpos}}, @w{int @var{range}}, @w{regexp_registers_t @var{regs}}, @w{int @var{mstop}})
Search for a substring of the concatenation of @var{string1} and
@var{string2} matching the regular expression represented by
@var{compiled}.  As with @code{re_search}, positive values of
@var{range} search forwards and negative values search backwards.
Matching begins at the offset @var{startpos} in the concatenated string,
and any match must end at or before the offset
@var{mstop}.@footnote{This function is used in the X11/Motif version of
Z-Mail for wraparound searches in text widgets; in this case,
@var{mstop} is used to prevent the search from overlapping the original
search position.}

Return values are as for @code{re_search}.

Substrings matched by grouped subpatterns are recorded in the structure
pointed to by @var{regs}.
@end deftypefun

@node Matching,  , Searching, Using Compiled Patterns
@section Matching
These functions are primarily useful for constructing other pattern
searching algorithms; matching is anchored to the starting position
(the @code{anchor} field of the @code{regexp_t} is not used).

@deftypefun int re_match (@w{regexp_t @var{compiled}}, @w{char *@var{string}}, @w{int @var{size}}, @w{int @var{pos}}, @w{regexp_registers_t @var{regs}})
Match the regular expression represented by @var{compiled} against the given
@var{string} beginning at the offset @var{pos} and searching no farther than
the offset @var{size}.  Note that @var{string} is @emph{not} considered to
be @code{NUL} terminated, so zero-valued characters may appear and be matched
within the space indicated by @var{size}.

Returns the length of the matched portion (which may be zero), or less
than zero on any error.  A return of @w{-1} means the regular expression
does not match the string; @w{-2} means a real error (such as failure
stack overflow) was encountered.

Substrings matched by grouped subpatterns are recorded in the structure
pointed to by @var{regs}.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun int re_match_2 (@w{regexp_t @var{compiled}}, @w{const char *@var{string1}}, @w{int @var{size1}}, @w{const char *@var{string2}}, @w{int @var{size2}}, @w{int @var{pos}}, @w{regexp_registers_t @var{regs}}, @w{int @var{mstop}})
Match the regular expression comiled in @var{compiled} against the
concatenation of @var{string1} and @var{string2}.  The length of each
string is given by @var{size1} and @var{size2}, respectively; the strings
are @emph{not} treated as @code{NUL}-terminated.

Matching begins at the offset @var{pos} in the concatenated string, and any
match must end at or before the offset @var{mstop}.

Return values are as for @code{re_match}.

Substrings matched by grouped subpatterns are recorded in the structure
pointed to by @var{regs}.
@end deftypefun

@node Convenience Routines, Index, Using Compiled Patterns, Top
@chapter Convenience Routines

@deftypefun {char *} re_comp (@w{const char *@var{pattern}})
Emulate the BSD 4.2 regex library routine @code{re_comp}.  This compiles
the regular expression @var{pattern} into an internal buffer, so at most
one search may be active at a time when using this function.  Returns
@code{NULL} if @var{pattern} was compiled successfully, or an error message
if there was an error.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun int re_exec (@w{const char *@var{string}})
Emulate the BSD 4.2 regexp library routine @code{re_exec}.  This returns
nonzero if @var{string} matches the regular expression most recently compiled
with @code{re_comp} (that is, a matching substring is found anywhere in
@var{string}).
@end deftypefun

@node Index,  , Convenience Routines, Top
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@contents
@bye
